Dear young people, dear believers, a
person can spend their whole life present
in church and yet still be blocked.
Blocked from experiencing God.
Blocked from feeling God.
And at the same time they can be driven
to look for answers as to why something in
their spiritual life just isn’t working.
I very often see people who are in church,
who practise their faith, and yet on
the other hand they’re unhappy; on the
other hand they have no experience of
God, and they have so, so many questions.
There are two things that block
us, and because of them we can’t
heal our soul and our heart.
One of them is that we’re
not honest with ourselves.
We’re not truly honest before God.
We can pretend, we can lie to others.
We can even lie to ourselves, but
we can’t hide anything from God.
God cannot heal and restore what
we haven’t even recognised, or
what we don’t want to ask for.
How is it that, if we are in God’s
grace, in communion with Jesus, if
we acknowledge Jesus as our Saviour,
Lord and Redeemer, how is it that
we practise the faith so much and
yet we are still spiritually unwell?
So spiritually unwell that, in our
weekly or fortnightly confessions,
we keep going round in circles,
repeating the very same things.
On the other hand, we’re capable of
putting on a false front, of lying, and we
don’t want to speak and admit to God the
essence of it all – and that is who I am.
Not who I present myself
as, but who I really am.
If a person truly wants to grow
spiritually, then they must
stop pretending and stop lying.
Some figures in psychology say that
ten to fifteen per cent of us all lie.
And it’s easier for people to lie
than to explain and tell the truth.
And why am I saying this?
Because Jesus is the one who says
that if we want to be spiritually
healed, made whole, he says that
only the truth can set us free.
So, dear young people, we
mustn’t put on an act before God.
We mustn’t lie before God.
Because, as I say, we’re committing
yet another additional sin.
We keep circling around God, but
we don’t allow Him to heal us.
That’s why, above all, we
need to be honest before God.
If we want that real, deep healing of our
soul and heart, we have to be truthful.
Let’s go step by step.
How many times do we catch ourselves
saying—lying, really—“This job is
great,” while on the other hand that
same job is draining us completely.
On the other hand, we present
ourselves as believers.
Yet our faith is so lukewarm, or
full of question marks and doubts.
And so it goes round and
round, round and round.
But the Lord wants to teach
us to be honest before him.
And in the Letter to the Ephesians,
chapter four, it says: therefore
let us put away lies and speak
the truth to one another.
I don’t even need to go into how falsely
we present ourselves to each other.
That’s not really the point.
The point is how, before God who
searches the human heart, who sees
right through every one of us, we hold
something back, we hide something, we
try to explain something away to God.
And in the First Letter of John it says:
if we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just and will forgive us our sins
and cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
The only condition for true healing,
for the recovery of our soul, is to
be honest before God about who I am.
Yet pride slaps us in the face
so often; pride gets in the way,
because those patterns of lying
teach us so much that sometimes we
even come to confession and lie.
And even in confession we
try to justify ourselves.
Where does this come from?
Think of the first people, Adam and Eve.
They lived in communion,
in harmony with God.
And when they sinned, each of
them felt it in their heart.
The very first thing each of
them felt in their heart was that
they had begun to hide from God.
So they covered themselves
with fig leaves.
The fig leaves represent the heart.
They wrapped up their heart.
Our heart is the centre of spirituality,
the centre of our relationship with God.
And you see, the first consequence
of their sin was precisely
that they covered their heart.
Why?
How did they know that
something had changed?
Because each of them suddenly
felt in their heart what they were
capable of doing to the other.
And then each of them said,
“I’m going to protect myself.
If I’m capable of hurting you, if
I’m capable of being jealous of you,
if I’m capable of envying you, then
what are you capable of doing to me?”
And that’s when mistrust was born.
They covered their hearts with fig
leaves; they began to hide from God.
That’s what it means when you
sometimes hear in a sermon: you need
to strip everything off the heart.
So, those fig leaves in the
Book of Genesis are, in our
spirituality today, the various
defence mechanisms in our hearts.
We’re so wounded and traumatised, yet we
suppress it so much that we don’t even
want to show it to the Lord or admit it.
And how, then, can the
Lord heal us spiritually?
And as long as we keep all that buried
inside us like that, we remain weak.
And then we keep repeating
the same patterns – of sin, of
habits, of everything – and we
just can’t seem to be healed.
We just can’t become happy.
Full of fear.
How is that possible, if spiritually
we’re so much in God’s grace – where
does such a level of fear come from?
It means that we too have covered our
hearts with something, we’re protecting
ourselves, and we’re hiding from God.
So how can God heal that something
if we keep hiding it, if we
haven’t truly come before God and
cried out for Him to set us free?
When Jesus was in the boat, when he was
out on the sea with the disciples and the
storm broke, they all woke up in fear;
the apostles were afraid for their lives.
How often do we today get caught
up in fear for our own lives?
How often do we panic too, at
certain moments in life, when we
lose our job or some other sense
of security, or someone we love?
Why are we people today so full of fear?
Why is it that you who are in
relationships or marriages—if you
married for love—why are you so afraid?
If you started a relationship with
someone out of love, why are you
scared you’ll lose that person?
Do you know the answer?
Do you know how sensible, normal people
in the business world invest their money?
They invest in a way that they’re not
fools who put everything into one person.
They’re not fools who’d stake
their one shot – everything they’ve
got, their capital – on a single
share that could collapse, and
overnight you’re left with nothing.
Why is it that some of you in
relationships and marriages are so tense
with fear: what if you lose that person?
Because you’ve placed all your love,
all your support, on that person.
You haven’t spread your capital of
love – giving love to your husband,
your wife, your fiancé or fiancée, to
friends, to other interests – instead
you’ve made a god out of that one person.
And of course you panic: if you
lose that person, you’ve lost
the ground beneath your feet.
So how is it that, even if we’ve
been healed by God’s grace,
spiritually restored, we’re still
living in such fear — what if God
takes that person from me as well?
Life is meant to have meaning.
Many people can’t see any point in
carrying on when they lose someone.
They can’t find their way, because
they invested everything in one person.
And where is God in all that?
How much do we factor God
into our sense of security?
And you see it there: when the
storm broke out, in that very same
boat Jesus was with the disciples.
Jesus was asleep while they were waking
him up, thinking they were going to die.
In…
in panic and fear for their lives.
And Jesus is asleep.
How often do we find
ourselves in that situation?
We claim we’re God’s people,
that we’re believers, and yet
we panic, we make a drama of it
all, while God beside us is calm.
That was their greatest weakness.
That same God, Jesus, was
in that very boat with them.
He sleeps peacefully.
They didn’t even stop to
think that God was with them.
They’re thinking about their
own lives, and yet God is in
the very same boat with them.
And it’s the same with you: when a
storm hits, how is it that, in every
storm, we suddenly forget where God is?
Do you really think God is like
that – just waiting to shove us
into some fire, into some storm,
into some uncertain situation, only
to leave us there and that’s it?
You don’t go through happy moments,
or stormy moments, or challenges,
or crises – you are never alone.
There you can see how much we go round
and round in church, and yet we don’t
have its basic, simple foundation in God.
God is holding all of this in His hands.
You can just see how wrongly we’ve
leaned on one another—making idols
out of people, making gods out
of material things as well—and
that’s why we’re tense and afraid.
Because, in essence, our
heart doesn’t belong to God.
Because if it’s that kind
of fear that paralyses you.
Secondly, it strikes me how
pronounced that fear is today.
And when something difficult happens
to you, what do you measure it by?
I mean, the challenge, the
storm, or whatever has hit you—if
you’re afraid, it’s simply a sign
you’re measuring it by yourself.
Because, of course, if there’s a really
big challenge in front of you, where God’s
intervention is needed, where a miracle
is needed, where God’s action is needed.
Of course I can’t do that.
But where’s my trust in that?
That’s where fear starts—when
I measure solving problems
and life by my own abilities.
And then I’m aware there are
things I simply can’t sort out.
That I can’t perform certain miracles.
But where is God in all this?
Where is God?
Because fear is faith the wrong way round.
Because in those moments you
start believing in failure
rather than in success.
And that’s why it’s so important to be
honest before God: do I really trust Him?
What did Jesus hate most
about the Pharisees?
He hated hypocrisy.
Because they said one thing,
but felt something else.
How many of us are hypocritical today?
This world is full of hypocrisy.
And even if we’re hypocritical
towards one another, we mustn’t
be like that before God.
Because the Pharisees and the others
were putting on an act before God
too — pretending they were spiritual,
that they knew all the Scriptures
— but that’s what irritated Jesus
most about them: their hypocrisy.
They said one thing, but they
didn’t surrender the other to God.
How many of us are like that today?
Let’s start with ourselves.
I say one thing, but in
practice is it really like that?
Each of us tonight needs to look at
ourselves and ask: am I a hypocrite?
Do I even want to grow spiritually?
Have I got used to behaving like that?
To be hypocritical, to be seen in
church, to be seen on pilgrimages,
and yet I’m still a hypocrite
because I’m not sincere before God.
Because I haven’t admitted it to Him.
Because I haven’t cried
out to Him sincerely.
So many people go to those sorts
of religious gatherings out of
curiosity, out of nosiness, out
of interest in other people.
And of course God can’t
do anything with that.
And for the Lord to heal us, the first
thing we need to do is admit everything.
When we stop lying to ourselves,
when we stop lying to God, only
then do we give ourselves a
chance for real spiritual growth.
It’s not a problem at
all what you’re like.
It’s not a problem what you’re
carrying inside; what matters is
whether you say it to God honestly,
whether you sincerely want to come
out of it, whether you want to grow.
That’s why it’s important that
we’re ready to walk in the truth.
It says in John’s Gospel: “You will
know the truth, and the truth will
set you free.” It isn’t always easy to
face yourself, to look in the mirror
and see what I’m really like, but the
worst thing is if I never do it at all.
And then there’s no real
spirituality in that.
With some people you can see it in
their spiritual life, in confession,
in everything: it’s just a kind of
folklore, not genuine spiritual growth.
As long as a believer keeps on…
putting their fears first, highlighting
their worries about themselves,
bringing up more and more doubts.
Each of us should ask ourselves
tonight: we don’t all need
healing at the same level.
You know, you could interpret and
talk about three levels of healing
in our spirituality, our soul,
and our relationship with God.
Some people don’t move forward at all.
Some are healed in two, and the
best is in all three dimensions.
We carry a lot within us, and of course
a lot of it isn’t even our own fault.
But God needs to heal it.
How many people are suffocated
by intrusive thoughts, doubts,
certain kinds of trauma — that
too needs the Lord to heal it.
And that needs to be
named before the Lord.
Or do you need to seek psychological help?
If you can see that your mind
is blocking you, that you can’t
move forward spiritually and
grow, then why not ask for help?
If you can see that the area of
your traumas and your past is
haunting you—false images of God, or
sinful habits and attachments—then
why not come before God in truth
and say, “Heal this in me, Lord”?
Why is it that you don’t even
see you’ve got certain wounds?
How strange is it when someone
comes to confession and says, “I
can’t forgive,” and yet they’ve
come to confession? I honestly don’t
know what more to say about that.
I mean, have you even thought about
it at all before you go to confession?
Because that refusal to
forgive is wounding you first.
OK, maybe no one ever
taught you how to forgive.
Come on, before you go to
confession, have a think.
How do you get rid of that?
How do you forgive?
Is there a way?
There is.
Truly.
Stand in the truth before God and say,
“Lord, I’m grieving, I’m wounded; maybe
I am to blame, maybe I’m not,” but all
of that is the area—like I said—where
we tend to sweep it under the carpet
or just move on, and in fact never
really work seriously on ourselves.
You young people can still be
taught; you’re like clay that
the potter can still shape.
But I’ve seen so many defiant people,
so many conceited, fake “spiritual”
types, the ones who won’t let anyone
tell them anything, who you’re not even
allowed to point out a weakness to.
That’s also a sign of spirituality:
whether, when you want to point
something out to someone in love,
you can say, “Listen, you need help.”
Come on, hand your life over to
the Lord a bit—tell him the truth,
the real truth about yourself.
What’s the point of putting on a false
front when you’re falling apart inside?
I know hundreds who are in churches,
presenting themselves falsely,
acting like spiritual gurus, making
themselves out to be examples of
holiness, and yet inside they’re like
whitewashed tombs, full of wounds.
They’re not doing it out of malice—no
one does that out of malice.
Who are the strong people?
Which women and men are strong?
Which ones?
The ones who can consciously say,
“Look, that was my weakness; I worked
on it; Lord, heal it.” I’m not afraid
to say I was weak in that area.
It’s not the ones who put on an act.
And you who are getting into
relationships, dear young people,
you can genuinely be surprised.
You know, you can be in a
relationship for a year, two, three,
and discover all sorts of things.
And at first it all seems
idyllic, doesn’t it?
You know that thing where lots of
young men have problems when they’re
getting married – and girls too, I
suppose – and then, right before the
wedding, that crisis hits: is this person
really for me, do I actually love her?
Especially if you’ve
been together for years.
You get used to the person, and then
you don’t even know any more whether
you feel anything for them – love,
or whatever it is you’ve got.
But it’s interesting,
that word “bride” – bride.
Someone explained it really nicely:
“news” is something you know
what it is – news, you know what
you’re getting from that news.
But a bride is “not-news”: you
don’t know what you’re getting.
You take it on and you take the risk.
Do you understand?
But you do it all with trust.
That’s why the Lord encourages us:
how merciful it is, this adoration of
ours – or any person can come, sincerely
open their soul before God, and there’s
no need to be afraid of weakness.
That’s why I say how wonderful it
is – those people, for me they’re
strong people, who’ve been through
something weak, something hard.
And psychologically that’s true: that
you can look back at your own past.
Saint Francis of Assisi, in his writings,
says this – he quotes a sentence.
“When I…” the document begins,
“when I was in sins…” So he starts
first by looking back at his past.
He has no problem
looking back at his past.
How many people are there who, at some
stage in their life, come back to the
Church, back to faith, and then they
start with those spiritual clichés:
“I’ve been living since 2006,” “I’ve
been a new man since 2015,” and then they
start counting from the date of their
conversion, their encounter with God — as
if everything before that doesn’t exist.
You know what I mean: they’ve
got a new birthday, you get it.
He’s a new creation, he’s a miracle.
And then they start counting
their life, their birthdays and
celebrations from that moment.
Of course, symbolically,
I know what they mean.
But hang on — the Lord
has delivered me from sin.
I’ve been Stjepan from conception
right up to now, to this very moment.
Because anyone who wipes out their
past, who can’t look at their
sinful past, hasn’t been healed yet.
Believe me.
Those who come out with those
spiritual clichés and “erase” the
past, who only emphasise the present
as if they’re up in seventh heaven
— great — you’ll crash sooner or later.
You can’t erase the past, because
that’s where the testimony is.
That was me, Lord — that
sinner, in that situation.
I admit it; heal me, and we move on.
And for your sake I will bear witness
to what you have done in my life.
That’s the right way.
And don’t erase the past, don’t
deny the wounds, don’t suppress
your feelings — none of that.
Pour it all out before Jesus.
I don’t know, when someone says, “Oh,
adoration is boring,” what do you mean?
I can’t even get through listing all
the problems and wounds and everything
I’ve piled up in a week before
I’ve finished pouring my heart out.
That only means you come
before Jesus like a mummy.
However perfect you are, my sunshine,
if you’ve come today, if you’ll be
at adoration later, however perfect
you are and psychologically stable,
and you come from a wonderful family
and go to Mass every day, you’re
spiritually strong—still, somehow
there’s always something to hand over
to Jesus, some truth that sets me free.
I really like those people who go to
prayer groups or to adoration and all
that, and they only ever pray for others
— like they’ve got no problems at all.
Well done, my dear.
Me, the moment I start praying for
others as well, I’ve got problems
— I’ve got problems even when I’m
praying for myself, and then when I’m
praying for others on top of that.
So it’s strange to me when some people
have nothing to pray for themselves about.
Mate, I’ve got plenty — and
I think everyone does.
Because if we take the whole day,
from morning onwards… and the only
thing I want to say at the end is:
learn to always tell God the truth.
Who you are, what you are, just as
you are – God loves you like that.
Amen.